
Hodges v Naish


No Substantial Judicial Treatment


Court
Queen’s Bench Division District Registry (Winchester)
 
Judgment Date
1 July 2021
 
Where Reported
[2021] EWHC 1805 (QB)
[2021] 6 WLUK 474
Judgment
 
Subject
Defamation
 
Other related subjects
Civil procedure; Arts and culture
 
Keywords
Causes of action; Dance; Limitation periods; Ordinary meaning; Publication; Serious harm; Sexual grooming; Slander
 
Judge
Judge Richard Parkes QC
 
Counsel
For the claimant: Gervase de Wilde (Direct Access).
For the defendant: In person.
 
Case Digest
Summary
Words spoken by the defendant to three of the claimant’s close friends during two separate conversations had the meaning that the claimant had groomed under-aged girls. It was equitable to disapply the limitation period to allow the claimant to rely on one of those conversations in his slander claim, which was actionable without proof of special damage because the words had imputed a crime and had been calculated to disparage the claimant in his business of a teacher and performer of Irish dance.
 
Abstract
The court was required to determine preliminary issues in a slander action.
 
The claimant and the defendant had been friends and had worked together for some years teaching and performing Irish dance. Their business relationship, and with it their friendship, had broken down. The claimant claimed damages for slanders allegedly spoken by the defendant shortly afterwards to certain individuals, including three of the claimant’s close friends, during a conversion in a car and a telephone call, in which allegations of sexual grooming had been made. He also sought an injunction to prevent their repetition, but had not claimed special damages. The telephone call was not pleaded as a cause of action in the particulars of claim. Five months after the expiry of the one-year limitation period the claimant applied to disapply the limitation period to rely on that publication.
 
 
Held
Preliminary issue determined.
 
Publication - During the car conversation the defendant had said that the claimant had been grooming young girls on social media so that he could stay friends with them and meet up with them for sex when they reached the age of consent, that parents had complained about his inappropriate behaviour, and that he had sexually transmitted diseases and had been sleeping with hundreds of girls. In the telephone conversion he had said that the claimant had been grooming young girls on social media (see para.23 of judgment).
 
Disapplication of limitation period in respect of telephone conversation - The delay for the full 12 months of the limitation period and five months beyond it appeared to have been the result of the failure of the claimant’s legal advisors to take the necessary action to plead the publication. Although he had a putative claim against his legal advisors, that was not a route which could offer effective vindication, and it would not assist him in obtaining an injunction against the person who he alleged was responsible for a campaign of vilification against him. Against a background in which damaging statements had been made about him by the defendant to many people that could not be sued on, because the words used were not known, there would be real prejudice to the claimant if he could not pursue his claim in respect of one of two occasions of actionable publication which he was able to establish. Given the similarity with the words used in the car conversation, any defence was likely to be identical. It was equitable to allow the claim to proceed (paras 110-111, 117-120).
 
Meaning - The words spoken had the meaning that the claimant had groomed under-aged girls (paras 128, 133).
 
Actionability - Slander was not actionable without proof of special damage except in two circumstances (i) slanders which imputed a crime for which the claimant could be made to suffer physically by way of punishment, and (ii) slanders calculated to disparage the claimant in any office, profession or business carried on by him at the time of publication. The precise offence need not be stated. An allegation of child grooming connoted a general charge of paedophile criminality. The words complained of in each instance of publication had been calculated to disparage the claimant in his business of a teacher and performer of Irish dance. The claimant had brought himself within both exceptions (paras 137-143).
 
Serious harm - The defendant’s words had caused serious harm to the standing of the claimant in the eyes of three close friends, and real damage to their friendships with him. In the small world of Irish dance, that was bound to be a seriously problematic development (paras.162).
 

